.TH tlpi-01 7 2025-12-09 Ammsiss

.SH CHAPTER
.B 1 - History and standards

.PP
Linux is a member of the UNIX family of operating systems. In computing terms,
UNIX has a long history. The first part of this chapter provides a brief outline of
that history. We begin with a description of the origins of the UNIX system and the
C programming language, and then consider the two key currents that led to the
Linux system as it exists today: the GNU project and the development of the Linux
kernel.

.PP
One of the notable features of the UNIX system is that its development was not
controlled by a single vendor or organization. Rather, many groups, both commer cial
and noncommercial, contributed to its evolution. This history resulted in many
innovative features being added to UNIX, but also had the negative consequence
that UNIX implementations diverged over time, so that writing applications that
worked on all UNIX implementations became increasingly difficult. This led to a
drive for standardization of UNIX implementations, which we discuss in the second
part of this chapter.

.PP
.RS
.I Two definitions of the term UNIX are in common use. One of these denotes
.I operating systems that have passed the official conformance tests for the Single
.I UNIX Specification and thus are officially granted the right to be branded
.I as “UNIX” by The Open Group (the holders of the UNIX trademark). At the
.I time of writing, none of the free UNIX implementations (e.g., Linux and
.I FreeBSD) has obtained this branding. The other common meaning attached to the
.I term UNIX denotes those systems that look and behave like classical UNIX systems
.I (i.e., the original Bell Laboratories UNIX and its later principal offshoots,
.I System V and BSD). By this definition, Linux is generally considered to be a
.I UNIX system (as are the modern BSDs). Although we give close attention to the
.I Single UNIX Specification in this book, we’ll follow this second definition
.I of UNIX, so that we’ll often say things such as “Linux, like other UNIX
.I implementations. . . .”
.RE

.SS \fI1.1\fR A Brief History of UNIX and C

.PP
The first UNIX implementation was developed in 1969 (the same year that Linus
Torvalds was born) by Ken Thompson at Bell Laboratories, a division of the telephone
corporation, AT&T. It was written in assembler for a Digital PDP-7 minicomputer.
The name UNIX was a pun on MULTICS (\fIMultiplexed Information and
Computing Service\fR), the name of an earlier operating system project in which AT&T
collaborated with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and General Elec tric.
(AT&T had by this time withdrawn from the project in frustration at its initial
failure to develop an economically useful system.) Thompson drew several ideas
for his new operating system from MULTICS, including a tree-structured file system,
a separate program for interpreting commands (the shell), and the notion of files
as unstructured streams of bytes.

.PP
In 1970, UNIX was rewritten in assembly language for a newly acquired Digital
PDP-11 minicomputer, then a new and powerful machine. Vestiges of this PDP-11
heritage can be found in various names still used on most UNIX implementations,
including Linux.

.PP
A short time later, Dennis Ritchie, one of Thompson’s colleagues at Bell Laboratories
and an early collaborator on UNIX, designed and implemented the C programming
language. This was an evolutionary process; C followed an earlier
interpreted language, B. B was initially implemented by Thompson and drew many
of its ideas from a still earlier programming language named BCPL. By 1973, C had
matured to a point where the UNIX kernel could be almost entirely rewritten in
the new language. UNIX thus became one of the earliest operating systems to be
written in a high-level language, a fact that made subsequent porting to other hard
ware architectures possible.

.PP
The genesis of C explains why it, and its descendant C++, have come to be used
so widely as system programming languages today. Previous widely used languages
were designed with other purposes in mind: FORTRAN for mathematical tasks
performed by engineers and scientists; COBOL for commercial systems processing
streams of record-oriented data. C filled a hitherto empty niche, and unlike FORTRAN
and COBOL (which were designed by large committees), the design of C
arose from the ideas and needs of a few individuals working toward a single goal:
developing a high-level language for implementing the UNIX kernel and associated
software. Like the UNIX operating system itself, C was designed by professional
programmers for their own use. The resulting language was small, efficient, powerful,
terse, modular, pragmatic, and coherent in its design.

.SS UNIX First through Sixth editions

.PP
Between 1969 and 1979, UNIX went through a number of releases, known as \fIeditions\fR.
Essentially, these releases were snapshots of the evolving development version at
AT&T. [Salus, 1994] notes the following dates for the first six editions of UNIX:

.IP \(bu 3
First Edition, November 1971: By this time, UNIX was running on the PDP-11
and already had a FORTRAN compiler and versions of many programs still
used today, including ar(1), cat(1), chmod(1), chown(1), cp(1), dc(1), ed(1),
find(1), ln(1), ls(1), mail(1), mkdir(1), mv(1), rm(1), sh(1), su(1), and who(1).

.IP \(bu 3
Second Edition, June 1972: By this time, UNIX was installed on ten machines
within AT&T.

.IP \(bu 3
Third Edition, February 1973: This edition included a C compiler and the first
implementation of pipes.

.IP \(bu 3
Fourth Edition, November 1973: This was the first version to be almost totally
written in C.

.IP \(bu 3
Fifth Edition, June 1974: By this time, UNIX was installed on more than 50 systems.

.IP \(bu 3
Sixth Edition, May 1975: This was the first edition to be widely used outside
AT&T.

.PP
Over the period of these releases, the use and reputation of UNIX began to spread,
first within AT&T, and then beyond. An important contribution to this growing
awareness was the publication of a paper on UNIX in the widely read journal
\fICommunications of the ACM\fR ([Ritchie & Thompson, 1974]).

.PP
At this time, AT&T held a government-sanctioned monopoly on the US tele phone
system. The terms of AT&T’s agreement with the US government prevented
it from selling software, which meant that it could not sell UNIX as a product.
Instead, beginning in 1974 with Fifth Edition, and especially with Sixth Edition,
AT&T licensed UNIX for use in universities for a nominal distribution fee. The
university distributions included documentation and the kernel source code (about
10,000 lines at the time).

.PP
AT&T’s release of UNIX into universities greatly contributed to the popularity
and use of the operating system, and by 1977, UNIX was running at some 500 sites,
including 125 universities in the United States and several other countries. UNIX
offered universities an interactive multiuser operating system that was cheap yet
powerful, at a time when commercial operating systems were very expensive. It also
gave university computer science departments the source code of a real operating
system, which they could modify and offer to their students to learn from and
experiment with. Some of these students, armed with UNIX knowledge, became
UNIX evangelists. Others went on to found or join the multitude of startup companies
selling inexpensive computer workstations running the easily ported UNIX
operating system.

.SS The birth of BSD and System V

.PP
January 1979 saw the release of Seventh Edition UNIX, which improved the reliability
of the system and provided an enhanced file system. This release also con tained a
number of new tools, including awk(1), make(1), sed(1), tar(1), uucp(1), the Bourne shell,
and a FORTRAN 77 compiler. The release of Seventh Edition is also significant because,
from this point, UNIX diverged into two important variants: BSD and System V, whose
origins we now briefly describe.

.PP
Thompson spent the 1975/1976 academic year as a visiting professor at the
University of California at Berkeley, the university from which he had graduated.
There, he worked with several graduate students, adding many new features to
UNIX. (One of these students, Bill Joy, subsequently went on to cofound Sun
Microsystems, an early entry in the UNIX workstation market.) Over time, many
new tools and features were developed at Berkeley, including the \fIC shell\fR, the
\fIvi\fR editor, an improved file system (\fIthe Berkeley Fast File System\fR),
\fIsendmail\fR, a Pascal compiler, and virtual memory management on the new Digital
VAX architecture.

.PP
Under the name Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD), this version of UNIX,
including its source code, came to be widely distributed. The first full distribution
was 3BSD in December 1979. (Earlier releases from Berkeley—BSD and 2BSD—
were distributions of new tools produced at Berkeley, rather than complete UNIX
distributions.)

.PP
In 1983, the \fIComputer Systems Research Group\fR at the University of California at
Berkeley released 4.2BSD. This release was significant because it contained a complete
TCP/IP implementation, including the sockets application programming
interface (API) and a variety of networking tools. 4.2BSD and its predecessor
4.1BSD became widely distributed within universities around the world. They also
formed the basis for SunOS (first released in 1983), the UNIX variant sold by Sun.
Other significant BSD releases were 4.3BSD, in 1986, and the final release, 4.4BSD,
in 1993.

.PP
.RS
.I The very first ports of the UNIX system to hardware other than the PDP-11
.I occurred during 1977 and 1978, when Dennis Ritchie and Steve Johnson
.I ported it to the Interdata 8/32 and Richard Miller at the University of Wollongong
.I in Australia simultaneously ported it to the Interdata 7/32. The Berkeley
.I Digital VAX port was based on an earlier (1978) port by John Reiser and Tom
.I London. Known as 32V, this port was essentially the same as Seventh Edition
.I for the PDP-11, except for the larger address space and wider data types.
.RE

.PP
In the meantime, US antitrust legislation forced the breakup of AT&T (legal
maneuvers began in the mid-1970s, and the breakup became effective in 1982),
with the consequence that, since it no longer held a monopoly on the telephone
system, the company was permitted to market UNIX. This resulted in the release of
System III (three) in 1981. System III was produced by AT&T’s UNIX Support
Group (USG), which employed many hundreds of developers to enhance UNIX
and develop UNIX applications (notably, document preparation packages and software
development tools). The first release of System V (five) followed in 1983, and
a series of releases led to the definitive System V Release 4 (SVR4) in 1989, by
which time System V had incorporated many features from BSD, including networking
facilities. System V was licensed to a variety of commercial vendors, who
used it as the basis of their UNIX implementations.

.PP
Thus, in addition to the various BSD distributions spreading through academia
, by the late 1980s, UNIX was available in a range of commercial implementations
on various hardware. These implementations included Sun’s SunOS and later
Solaris, Digital’s Ultrix and OSF/1 (nowadays, after a series of renamings and
acquisitions, HP Tru64 UNIX), IBM’s AIX, Hewlett-Packard’s (HP’s) HP-UX,
NeXT’s NeXTStep, A/UX for the Apple Macintosh, and Microsoft and SCO’s
XENIX for the Intel x86-32 architecture. (Throughout this book, the Linux implementation
for x86-32 is referred to as Linux/x86-32.) This situation was in sharp
contrast to the typical proprietary hardware/operating system scenarios of the
time, where each vendor produced one, or at most a few, proprietary computer
chip architectures, on which they sold their own proprietary operating system(s).
The proprietary nature of most vendor systems meant that purchasers were locked
into one vendor. Switching to another proprietary operating system and hardware
platform could become very expensive because of the need to port existing applications
and retrain staff. This factor, coupled with the appearance of cheap single-user
UNIX workstations from a variety of vendors, made the portable UNIX system
increasingly attractive from a commercial perspective.

.SS \fI1.1\fR A Brief History of Linux

.PP
The term \fILinux\fR is commonly used to refer to the entire UNIX-like operating system
of which the Linux kernel forms a part. However, this is something of a misnomer
, since many of the key components contained within a typical commercial
Linux distribution actually originate from a project that predates the inception
of Linux by several years.

.SS \fI1.2.1\fR The GNU Project

.PP
In 1984, Richard Stallman, an exceptionally talented programmer who had been
working at MIT, set to work on creating a “free” UNIX implementation. Stallman’s
outlook was a moral one, and free was defined in a legal sense, rather than a financial
sense (see \fIhttp://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html\fR). Nevertheless, the legal
freedom that Stallman described carried with it the implicit consequence that software
such as operating systems would be available at no or very low cost.

.PP
Stallman militated against the legal restrictions placed on proprietary operating
systems by computer vendors. These restrictions meant that purchasers of computer
software in general could not see the source code of the software they were
buying, and they certainly could not copy, change, or redistribute it. He pointed
out that such a framework encouraged programmers to compete with each other
and hoard their work, rather than to cooperate and share it.

.PP
In response, Stallman started the GNU project (a recursively defined acronym
for “GNU’s not UNIX”) to develop an entire, freely available, UNIX-like system,
consisting of a kernel and all associated software packages, and encouraged others
to join him. In 1985, Stallman founded the Free Software Foundation (FSF), a nonprofit
organization to support the GNU project as well as the development of free
software in general.

.PP
.RS
.I When the GNU project was started, BSD was not free in the sense that Stallman
.I meant. Use of BSD still required a license from AT&T, and users could
.I not freely modify and redistribute the AT&T code that formed part of BSD.
.RE

.PP
One of the important results of the GNU project was the development of the GNU
\fIGeneral Public License\fR (GPL), the legal embodiment of Stallman’s notion of free
software. Much of the software in a Linux distribution, including the kernel, is
licensed under the GPL or one of a number of similar licenses. Software licensed
under the GPL must be made available in source code form, and must be freely
redistributable under the terms of the GPL. Modifications to GPL-licensed software
are freely permitted, but any distribution of such modified software must also
be under the terms of the GPL. If the modified software is distributed in executable
form, the author must also allow any recipients the option of obtaining the
modified source for no more than the cost of distribution. The first version of the
GPL was released in 1989. The current version of the license, version 3, was
released in 2007. Version 2 of the license, released in 1991, remains in wide use,
and is the license used for the Linux kernel. (Discussions of various free software
licenses can be found in [St. Laurent, 2004] and [Rosen, 2005].)

.PP
The GNU project did not initially produce a working UNIX kernel, but did
produce a wide range of other programs. Since these programs were designed to
run on a UNIX-like operating system, they could be, and were, used on existing
UNIX implementations and, in some cases, even ported to other operating systems.
Among the more well-known programs produced by the GNU project are the
Emacs text editor, GCC(1) (originally the GNU C compiler, but now renamed the
GNU compiler collection, comprising compilers for C, C++, and other languages),
the bash(1) shell, and glibc(7) (the GNU C library).

.PP
By the early 1990s, the GNU project had produced a system that was virtually
complete, except for one important component: a working UNIX kernel. The GNU
project had started work on an ambitious kernel design, known as the GNU/HURD,
based on the Mach microkernel. However, the HURD was far from being in a form
that could be released. (At the time of writing, work continues on the HURD,
which currently runs only on the x86-32 architecture.)

.PP
.RS
.I Because a significant part of the program code that constitutes what is com-
.I monly known as the Linux system actually derives from the GNU project, Stall-
.I man prefers to use the term GNU/Linux to refer to the entire system. The
.I question of naming (Linux versus GNU/Linux) is the source of some debate
.I in the free software community. Since this book is primarily concerned with
.I the API of the Linux kernel, we’ll generally use the term Linux.
.RE

.PP
The stage was set. All that was required was a working kernel to go with the otherwise
complete UNIX system already produced by the GNU project.

.SS \fI1.2.2\fR The Linux Kernel

.PP
In 1991, Linus Torvalds, a Finnish student at the University of Helsinki, was
inspired to write an operating system for his Intel 80386 PC. In the course of his
studies, Torvalds had come into contact with Minix, a small UNIX-like operating
system kernel developed in the mid-1980s by Andrew Tanenbaum, a university professor
in Holland. Tanenbaum made Minix, complete with source code, available
as a tool for teaching operating system design in university courses. The Minix ker-
nel could be built and run on a 386 system. However, since its primary purpose was
as a teaching tool, it was designed to be largely independent of the hardware architecture,
and it did not take full advantage of the 386 processor’s capabilities.

.PP
Torvalds therefore started on a project to create an efficient, full-featured
UNIX kernel to run on the 386. Over a few months, Torvalds developed a basic
kernel that allowed him to compile and run various GNU programs. Then, on
October 5, 1991, Torvalds requested the help of other programmers, making the
following now much-quoted announcement of version 0.02 of his kernel in the
\fIcomp.os.minix\fR Usenet newsgroup:

.PP
.RS
Do you pine for the nice days of Minix-1.1, when men were men
and wrote their own device drivers? Are you without a nice
project and just dying to cut your teeth on a OS you can try to
modify for your needs? Are you finding it frustrating when
everything works on Minix? No more all-nighters to get a nifty
program working? Then this post might be just for you. As I
mentioned a month ago, I’m working on a free version of a
Minix-look-alike for AT-386 computers. It has finally reached the
stage where it’s even usable (though may not be depending on
what you want), and I am willing to put out the sources for wider
distribution. It is just version 0.02 . . . but I’ve successfully run
bash, gcc, gnu-make, gnu-sed, compress, etc. under it.
.RE

.PP
Following a time-honored tradition of giving UNIX clones names ending with the
letter X, the kernel was (eventually) baptized Linux. Initially, Linux was placed
under a more restrictive license, but Torvalds soon made it available under the
GNU GPL.

.PP
The call for support proved effective. Other programmers joined Torvalds in
the development of Linux, adding various features, such as an improved file
system, networking support, device drivers, and multiprocessor support. By
March 1994, the developers were able to release version 1.0. Linux 1.2 appeared
in March 1995, Linux 2.0 in June 1996, Linux 2.2 in January 1999, and Linux 2.4 in
January 2001. Work on the 2.5 development kernel began in November 2001, and
led to the release of Linux 2.6 in December 2003.

.SS An aside: the BSDs

.PP
It is worth noting that another free UNIX was already available for the x86-32 during
the early 1990s. Bill and Lynne Jolitz had developed a port of the already
mature BSD system for the x86-32, known as 386/BSD. This port was based on the
BSD Net/2 release ( June 1991), a version of the 4.3BSD source code in which all
remaining proprietary AT&T source code had either been replaced or, in the case
of six source code files that could not be trivially rewritten, removed. The Jolitzes
ported the Net/2 code to x86-32, rewrote the missing source files, and made the
first release (version 0.0) of 386/BSD in February 1992.

.PP
After an initial wave of success and popularity, work on 386/BSD lagged
for various reasons. In the face of an increasingly large backlog of patches, two
alternative development groups soon appeared, creating their own releases based
on 386/BSD: NetBSD, which emphasizes portability to a wide range of hardware
platforms, and FreeBSD, which emphasizes performance and is the most widespread
of the modern BSDs. The first NetBSD release was 0.8, in April 1993. The
first FreeBSD CD-ROM (version 1.0) appeared in December 1993. Another BSD,
OpenBSD, appeared in 1996 (as an initial version numbered 2.0) after forking
from the NetBSD project. OpenBSD emphasizes security. In mid-2003, a new BSD,
DragonFly BSD, appeared after a split from FreeBSD 4.x. DragonFly BSD takes a
different approach from FreeBSD 5.x with respect to design for symmetric multi-processing
(SMP) architectures.

.PP
Probably no discussion of the BSDs in the early 1990s is complete without mention
of the lawsuits between UNIX System Laboratories (USL, the AT&T subsidiary
spun off to develop and market UNIX) and Berkeley. In early 1992, the company
Berkeley Software Design, Incorporated (BSDi, nowadays part of Wind River)
began distributing a commercially supported BSD UNIX, BSD/OS, based on the
Net/2 release and the Jolitzes’ 386/BSD additions. BSDi distributed binaries and
source code for $995 (US dollars), and advised potential customers to use their
telephone number 1-800-ITS-UNIX.

.PP
In April 1992, USL filed suit against BSDi in an attempt to prevent BSDi from
selling a product that USL claimed was still encumbered by proprietary USL source
code and trade secrets. USL also demanded that BSDi cease using the deceptive
telephone number. The suit was eventually widened to include a claim against the
University of California. The court ultimately dismissed all but two of USL’s claims,
and a countersuit by the University of California against USL ensued, in which the
university claimed that USL had not given due credit for the use of BSD code in
System V.

.PP
While these suits were pending, USL was acquired by Novell, whose CEO, the
late Ray Noorda, stated publicly that he would prefer to compete in the marketplace
rather than in the court. Settlement was finally reached in January 1994, with
the University of California being required to remove 3 of the 18,000 files in the
Net/2 release, make some minor changes to a few other files, and add USL copyright
notices to around 70 other files, which the university nevertheless could
continue to distribute freely. This modified system was released as 4.4BSD-Lite
in June 1994. (The last release from the university was 4.4BSD-Lite, Release 2 in
June 1995.) At this point, the terms of the legal settlement required BSDi,
FreeBSD, and NetBSD to replace their Net/2 base with the modified 4.4BSD-Lite
source code. As [McKusick et al., 1996] notes, although this caused some delay in
the development of the BSD derivatives, it also had the positive effect that these
systems resynchronized with the three years of development work done by the university's
Computer Systems Research Group since the release of Net/2.

.SS Linux kernel version numbers

.PP
Like most free software projects, Linux follows a release-early, release-often model,
so that new kernel revisions appear frequently (sometimes even daily). As the
Linux user base increased, the release model was adapted to decrease disruption to
existing users. Specifically, following the release of Linux 1.0, the kernel developers
adopted a kernel version numbering scheme with each release numbered \fIx\fR.\fIy\fR.\fIz\fR:
\fIx\fR representing a major version, \fIy\fR a minor version within that major version, and
\fIz\fR a revision of the minor version (minor improvements and bug fixes).

.PP
Under this model, two kernel versions were always under development: a \fIstable\fR
branch for use on production systems, which had an even minor version number,
and a more volatile \fIdevelopment\fR branch, which carried the next higher odd minor
version number. The theory—not always followed strictly in practice—was that all
new features should be added in the current development kernel series, while new
revisions in the stable kernel series should be restricted to minor improvements
and bug fixes. When the current development branch was deemed suitable for
release, it became the new stable branch and was assigned an even minor version
number. For example, the 2.3.\fIz\fR development kernel branch resulted in the 2.4
stable kernel branch.

.PP
.RS
\fBErrata (9, 2011-07-29, WONTFIX): As a consequence of the (July 2011) renumbering of the Linux kernel series from 2.6.x to 3.x and then 4.x, 5.x, and (most recently) 6.x, the discussion of kernel numbering in this section is now out-of-date. However, all that has changed is that the numbering scheme has been simplified (replacing an invariant 2.6 with 3 and, subsequently, 4, 5, and 6); the kernel development model remains unchanged. As Linus Torvalds noted of the 3.0 release, there is otherwise nothing special about the release (i.e., no changes more significant than those in Linux 2.6.39 and each of the preceding 2.6.x releases).\fR

.PP
\fBIn the bulleted list below, each of the instances of 2.6.z could simply be replaced by 6.z
and the description on this page would still be accurate for the current kernel development
model. \fR

.RE
.PP
Following the 2.6 kernel release, the development model was changed. The
main motivation for this change arose from problems and frustrations caused by
the long intervals between stable kernel releases. (Nearly three years passed
between the release of Linux 2.4.0 and 2.6.0.) There have periodically been discussions
about fine-tuning this model, but the essential details have remained as follows:

.IP \(bu 3
There is no longer a separation between stable and development kernels. Each
new 2.6.\fIz\fR release can contain new features, and goes through a life cycle that
begins with the addition of new features, which are then stabilized over the
course of a number of candidate release versions. When a candidate version is
deemed sufficiently stable, it is released as kernel 2.6.\fIz\fR. Release cycles are typically
about three months long.

.IP \(bu 3
Sometimes, a stable 2.6.\fIz\fR release may require minor patches to fix bugs or security
problems. If these fixes have a sufficiently high priority, and the patches
are deemed simple enough to be “obviously” correct, then, rather than waiting
for the next 2.6.\fIz\fR release, they are applied to create a release with a number of
the form 2.6.\fIz\fR.\fIr\fR, where \fIr\fR is a sequential number for a minor revision of this
2.6.\fIz\fR kernel.

.IP \(bu 3
Additional responsibility is shifted onto distribution vendors to ensure the stability
of the kernel provided with a distribution.

.PP
Later chapters will sometimes note the kernel version in which a particular API
change (i.e., new or modified system call) occurred. Although, prior to the 2.6.\fIz\fR
series, most kernel changes occurred in the odd-numbered development branches,
we’ll generally refer to the following stable kernel version in which the change
appeared, since most application developers would normally be using a stable kernel,
rather than one of the development kernels. In many cases, the manual pages
note the precise development kernel in which a particular feature appeared or
changed.

.PP
For changes that appear in the 2.6.\fIz\fR kernel series, we note the precise kernel
version. When we say that a feature is new in kernel 2.6, without a \fIz\fR revision number,
we mean a feature that was implemented in the 2.5 development kernel series
and first appeared in the stable kernel at version 2.6.0.

.PP
.RS
\fIAt the time of writing, the 2.4 stable Linux kernel is still supported by maintainers
who incorporate essential patches and bug fixes, and periodically
release new revisions. This allows installed systems to continue to use 2.4 kernels,
rather than being forced to upgrade to a new kernel series (which may
entail significant work in some cases).\fR

.PP
.RS
\fBErratta (9, 2012-04-10, WONTFIX): In the paragraph above, \(dqAt the time of writing,
the 2.4 stable linux kernel is still supported...\(dq is no longer true: in April
2012, Willy Tarreau, the Linux 2.4 maintainer, noted that the 2.4 kernel
series has now reached end-of-life.\fR
.RE
.RE

.SS Ports to other hardware architectures

.PP
During the initial development of Linux, efficient implementation on the Intel
80386 was the primary goal, rather than portability to other processor architectures.
However, with the increasing popularity of Linux, ports to other processor
architectures began to appear, starting with an early port to the Digital Alpha chip.
The list of hardware architectures to which Linux has been ported continues to grow
and includes x86-64, Motorola/IBM PowerPC and PowerPC64, Sun SPARC and
SPARC64 (UltraSPARC), MIPS, ARM (Acorn), IBM zSeries (formerly System/390),
Intel IA-64 (Itanium; see [Mosberger & Eranian, 2002]), Hitachi SuperH, HP
PA-RISC, and Motorola 68000.

.SS Linux Distributions

.PP
Precisely speaking, the term \fILinux\fR refers just to the kernel developed by Linus Torvalds
and others. However, the term \fILinux\fR is commonly used to mean the kernel, plus a
wide range of other software (tools and libraries) that together make a complete
operating system. In the very early days of Linux, the user was required to assemble
all of this software, create a file system, and correctly place and configure all of the
software on that file system. This demanded considerable time and expertise. As a
result, a market opened for Linux distributors, who created packages (\fIdistributions\fR)
to automate most of the installation process, creating a file system and installing
the kernel and other required software.

.PP
The earliest distributions appeared in 1992, and included MCC Interim Linux
(Manchester Computing Centre, UK), TAMU (Texas A&M University), and SLS
(SoftLanding Linux System). The oldest surviving commercial distribution, Slackware,
appeared in 1993. The noncommercial Debian distribution appeared at around
the same time, and SUSE and Red Hat soon followed. The currently very popular
Ubuntu distribution first appeared in 2004. Nowadays, many distribution companies
also employ programmers who actively contribute to existing free software
projects or initiate new projects.

.SS \fI1.3\fR Standardization
